Exercise 1.2 - Adding nodes to F5 BIG-IP
========================================

Objective
---------

Demonstrate use of the `BIG-IP node
module <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/bigip_node_module.html>`__
to add two RHEL (Red Hat Enterprise Linux) web servers as nodes for the
BIG-IP load balancer.

Guide
-----

**Step 1**

Using your text editor of choice create a new file called ``bigip-node.yml``.

.. code::

   [student1@ansible ~]$ nano bigip-node.yml

   ``vim`` and ``nano`` are available on the control node

**Step 2**

Enter the following play definition into ``bigip-node.yml``:

.. code-block:: yaml

 ---
 - name: BIG-IP SETUP
   hosts: lb
   connection: local
   gather_facts: false

-  The ``---`` at the top of the file indicates that this is a YAML file.
-  The ``hosts: lb``, indicates the play is run only on the lb group.Technically there only one F5 device but if there were multiple they
   would be configured simultaneously.
-  ``connection: local`` tells the Playbook to run locally (rather than SSHing to itself)
-  ``gather_facts: false`` disables facts gathering. We are not using any fact variables for this playbook.

**Step 3**

Next, add the first ``task``. This task will use the ``set_fact`` module to set a parameter called 'provider'.

This parameter will hold all the connection details to the BIG-IP and will be used in subsequent tasks

.. code-block:: yaml

 ---
 - name: BIG-IP SETUP
   hosts: lb
   connection: local
   gather_facts: false

  tasks:

  - set_fact:
     provider:
      server: "{{private_ip}}"
      user: "{{ansible_user}}"
      password: "{{ansible_ssh_pass}}"
      server_port: 8443
      validate_certs: no
      
-  The ``server: "{{private_ip}}"`` parameter tells the module to
   connect to the F5 BIG-IP IP address, which is stored as a variable
   ``private_ip`` in inventory
-  The ``user: "{{ansible_user}}"`` parameter tells the module the
   username to login to the F5 BIG-IP device with
-  The ``password: "{{ansible_ssh_pass}}"`` parameter tells the module
   the password to login to the F5 BIG-IP device with
-  The ``server_port: 8443`` parameter tells the module the port to
   connect to the F5 BIG-IP device with

**Step 4**

Next, add task ``bigip_node`` module to configure the two RHEL web servers as nodes on the BIG-IP F5 load
balancer.

.. code-block:: yaml

 ---
 - name: BIG-IP SETUP
   hosts: lb
   connection: local
   gather_facts: false

  tasks:

  - set_fact:
     provider:
      server: "{{private_ip}}"
      user: "{{ansible_user}}"
      password: "{{ansible_ssh_pass}}"
      server_port: 8443
      validate_certs: no
        
  - name: CREATE NODES
    bigip_node:
      provider: "{{provider}}"
      host: "{{hostvars[item].ansible_host}}"
      name: "{{hostvars[item].inventory_hostname}}"
    loop: "{{ groups['webservers'] }}"


A `loop <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/playbooks_loops.html>`__ will repeat a task on a list provided to the task. In this case itwill loop twice, once for each of the two web servers.

-  ``name: CREATE NODES`` is a user defined description that will
   display in the terminal output.
-  ``bigip_node:`` tells the task which module to use. Everything except
   ``loop`` is a module parameter defined on the module documentation
   page.
-  The ``name: "{{hostvars[item].inventory_hostname}}"`` parameter tells
   the module to use the ``inventory_hostname`` as the name (which will
   be host1 and host2).
-  ``loop:`` tells the task to loop over the provided list. The list in
   this case is the group webservers which includes two RHEL hosts.

**Step 5**

Run the playbook - exit back into the command line of the control host and execute the following:

.. code::

   [student1@ansible ~]$ ansible-playbook bigip-node.yml

Playbook Output
---------------

The output will look as follows.

.. code:: yaml

    [student1@ansible]$ ansible-playbook bigip-node.yml

    PLAY [BIG-IP SETUP] ************************************************************

    TASK [CREATE NODES] ************************************************************
    changed: [f5] => (item=host1)
    changed: [f5] => (item=host2)

    PLAY RECAP *********************************************************************
    f5                         : ok=1    changed=1    unreachable=0    failed=0

Solution
--------

The finished Ansible Playbook is provided here for an Answer key. Click
here: `bigip-node.yml <../1.2-add-node/bigip-node.yml>`__.

Verifying the Solution
----------------------

Login to the F5 with your web browser to see what was configured. Grab
the IP information for the F5 load balancer from the
lab_inventory/hosts file, and type it in like so: https://X.X.X.X:8443/

Login information for the BIG-IP: - username: admin - password: ansible OR what is provided at the time of spinning up the infrastruture

The list of nodes can be found by navigating the menu on the left. Click on Local Traffic-> then click on Nodes.

**You have finished this exercise**

Go back to the `home directory <../docs/index.rst>`_ or go `next <../docs/1.3-add-pool.rst>`_.
