Exercise 1.7: Using the bigip_config module to save running config
==================================================================

Objective
---------

Demonstrate use of the `BIG-IP config
module <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/bigip_config_module.html>`__
to save the running configuration to disk

Guide
-----

**Step 1**


Using your text editor of choice create a new file called ``bigip-config.yml``.

.. code::

    [student1@ansible ~]$ nano bigip-config.yml

    ``vim`` and ``nano`` are available on the control node

**Step 2**

Enter the following play definition into ``bigip-virtual-server.yml``:

.. code:: yaml

    ---
    - name: BIG-IP SETUP
      hosts: lb
      connection: local
      gather_facts: false

-  The ``---`` at the top of the file indicates that this is a YAML
   file.
-  The ``hosts: f5``, indicates the play is run only on the F5 BIG-IP
   device
-  ``connection: local`` tells the Playbook to run locally (rather than
   SSHing to itself)
-  ``gather_facts: no`` disables facts gathering. We are not using any
   fact variables for this playbook.

Step 3
------

Next, add the ``task``. This task will use the ``bigip-config`` to save
the running configuration to disk

.. code:: yaml

    ---
    - name: BIG-IP SETUP
      hosts: lb
      connection: local
      gather_facts: false

      tasks:

	  - set_fact:
         provider:
          server: "{{private_ip}}"
          user: "{{ansible_user}}"
          password: "{{ansible_ssh_pass}}"
          server_port: 8443
          validate_certs: no
      
	  - name: SAVE RUNNING CONFIG ON BIG-IP
        bigip_config:
		  provider: "{{provider}}"
          save: yes

-  ``name: SAVE RUNNING CONFIG ON BIG-IP`` is a user defined description
   that will display in the terminal output.
-  ``bigip_config:`` tells the task which module to use.
-  The ``save: "yes""`` parameter tells the module to save the
   running-config to startup-config. This operation is performed after
   any changes are made to the current running config. If no changes are
   made, the configuration is still saved to the startup config. This option will always cause the
   module to return changed

**Step 4**

Run the playbook - exit back into the command line of the control host and execute the following:

.. code::

    [student1@ansible ~]$ ansible-playbook bigip-config.yml

Playbook Output
---------------

.. code:: yaml

    [student1@ansible]$ ansible-playbook bigip-config.yml

    PLAY [BIG-IP SETUP] ************************************************************************************************************************

    TASK [SAVE RUNNING CONFIG ON BIG-IP] ************************************************************************************************************************
    changed: [f5]

    PLAY RECAP *************************************************************************************************************
    f5                         : ok=1    changed=1    unreachable=0    failed=0

Solution
--------

The finished Ansible Playbook is provided here for an Answer key. Click
here:
`bigip-config.yml <https://github.com/f5alliances/ansible-use-cases-101/blob/master/1.7-save-running-config/bigip-config.yml>`__.

**You have finished this exercise.**
