Exercise 2.1: Using a combination of modules to delete configuration on the BIG-IP
==================================================================================

Objective
---------

Demonstrate use of the different modules to delete the configuration
(Nodes/Pool/Virtual Server) on the BIG-IP. # Guide

**Step 1**

Using your text editor of choice create a new file called ``bigip-delete-configuration.yml``.

.. code::

   [student1@ansible ~]$ nano bigip-delete-configuration.yml

   ``vim`` and ``nano`` are available on the control node

**Step 2**

Enter the following play definition into ``bigip-delete-configuration.yml``:

.. code:: yaml

    ---
    - name: BIG-IP SETUP
      hosts: lb
      connection: local
      gather_facts: false

	  vars_files:
        virtuals_pools.yml
   
- The ``---`` at the top of the file indicates that this is
a YAML file. - The ``hosts: f5``, indicates the play is run only on the
F5 BIG-IP device - ``connection: local`` tells the Playbook to run
locally (rather than SSHing to itself) - ``gather_facts: no`` disables
facts gathering. We are not using any fact variables for this playbook.

**Step 3**

Add a tasks section with a set_fact for setting the provider values

.. code::

   tasks:
   - name: Setup provider
     set_fact:
       provider:
        server: "{{private_ip}}"
        user: "{{ansible_user}}"
        password: "{{ansible_ssh_pass}}"
        server_port: "8443"
        validate_certs: "no"

**Step 4**

Next, add the first ``task`` using the
`bigip_virtual_server <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/bigip_virtual_server_module.html>`__.
This task will be identical to Exercise 1.5 - Adding a virtual
server with an additional **state** parameter. The ``state: absent`` will remove the configuration
from the F5 BIG-IP load balancer.


.. code:: yaml

   - name: DELETE VIRTUAL SERVER
     bigip_virtual_server:
      provider: "{{provider}}"
      name: "{{item.vs_name}}"
      state: absent
     loop: "{{vips_pools}}"

- ``state: absent`` is a parameter that tells the module to delete the configuration

**Step 5**

Next, add the second ``task`` using the `bigip_pool <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/bigip_pool_module.html>`__.
This task will be identical to Exercise 1.3 - Adding a load balancing
pool with an additional **state** parameter set to ``absent``.

.. code:: yaml

   - name: DELETE POOL
     bigip_pool:
      provider: "{{provider}}"
      name: "{{item.pool_name}}"
      state: absent
     loop: "{{vips_pools}}"

**Step 6**

Finally, add the last ``task`` using the `bigip_node <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/modules/bigip_node_module.html>`__.
This task will be identical to Exercise 1.2 - Adding nodes to F5
BIG-IP with an additional **state** parameter set to``absent``.

.. code:: yaml

   - name: DELETE NODES
     bigip_node:
      provider: "{{provider}}"
      name: "{{hostvars[item].inventory_hostname}}"
      state: absent
    loop: "{{ groups['webservers'] }}"

The above playbook will delete the virtual server, then the
pool and then the nodes configured in previous exercises. Please note
the order of the playbooks and that this is mandatory to have the
configuration removed in the right order.

**Step 7**

Run the playbook - exit back into the command line of the control host
and execute the following:

.. code::
    
   [student1@ansible ~]$ ansible-playbook bigip-delete-configuration.yml

Playbook Output
---------------


.. code::

	PLAY [BIG-IP TEARDOWN] **************************************************************************************************************************************

	TASK [Setup provider] ***************************************************************************************************************************************
	ok: [f5]

	TASK [DELETE VIRTUAL SERVER] ********************************************************************************************************************************
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool', u'vs_name': u'vip', u'port': 8081})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool1', u'vs_name': u'vip1', u'port': 8082})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool2', u'vs_name': u'vip2', u'port': 8083})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool3', u'vs_name': u'vip3', u'port': 8084})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool4', u'vs_name': u'vip4', u'port': 8085})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool5', u'vs_name': u'vip5', u'port': 8086})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool6', u'vs_name': u'vip6', u'port': 8087})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool7', u'vs_name': u'vip7', u'port': 8088})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool8', u'vs_name': u'vip8', u'port': 8089})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool9', u'vs_name': u'vip9', u'port': 8090})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool10', u'vs_name': u'vip10', u'port': 8091})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool11', u'vs_name': u'vip11', u'port': 8092})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool12', u'vs_name': u'vip12', u'port': 8093})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool13', u'vs_name': u'vip13', u'port': 8094})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool14', u'vs_name': u'vip14', u'port': 8095})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool15', u'vs_name': u'vip15', u'port': 8096})

	TASK [DELETE POOL] ******************************************************************************************************************************************
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool', u'vs_name': u'vip', u'port': 8081})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool1', u'vs_name': u'vip1', u'port': 8082})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool2', u'vs_name': u'vip2', u'port': 8083})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool3', u'vs_name': u'vip3', u'port': 8084})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool4', u'vs_name': u'vip4', u'port': 8085})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool5', u'vs_name': u'vip5', u'port': 8086})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool6', u'vs_name': u'vip6', u'port': 8087})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool7', u'vs_name': u'vip7', u'port': 8088})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool8', u'vs_name': u'vip8', u'port': 8089})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool9', u'vs_name': u'vip9', u'port': 8090})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool10', u'vs_name': u'vip10', u'port': 8091})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool11', u'vs_name': u'vip11', u'port': 8092})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool12', u'vs_name': u'vip12', u'port': 8093})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool13', u'vs_name': u'vip13', u'port': 8094})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool14', u'vs_name': u'vip14', u'port': 8095})
	changed: [f5] => (item={u'pool_name': u'http-pool15', u'vs_name': u'vip15', u'port': 8096})

	TASK [DELETE NODES] *****************************************************************************************************************************************
	changed: [f5] => (item=host1)
	changed: [f5] => (item=host2)
Solution
--------

The finished Ansible Playbook is provided here for an Answer key. Click
here: `bigip-delete-configuration.yml <../2.1-delete-configuration/bigip-delete-configuration.yml>`__.

Verifying the Solution
----------------------

Login to the F5 with your web browser to see what was configured. Grab
the IP information for the F5 load balancer from the
lab\_inventory/hosts file, and type it in like so: https://X.X.X.X:8443/

Login information for the BIG-IP: - username: admin - password: admin

Navigate the menu on the left and view that the configuration has been
deleted. 

- Local Traffic Manager -> Virtual Server
- Local Traffic Manager -> Pool
- Local Traffic Manager -> Node

**You have finished this exercise.**