Exercise 3.1 - Operational Change with AS3
==========================================

Objective
---------

Demonstrate changing an existing Web Application AS3 template. There
is a problem with the existing template, the serviceMain is showing red.

Guide
-----

**Step 1**

Figure out what is wrong. Login to the F5 with your web browser to see
what was configured.

1. Click on ``ServiceMain`` to see why its down.
2. Look at the ``Availability`` field in the table.
3. Click on the ``Pools`` under ``Local Traffic``
4. Click on ``app_pool``
5. Click on the ``Members`` button

The port **443** is incorrect. The two RHEL web servers are only running
on port 80. This is why they are showing down.

**Step 2**

Using your text editor of choice open the existing jinja template ``as3_template.j2``:


**Step 3**

Find where the port **443** is and modify it to port **80**. Hint: use the previous exercise to understand where to look.

The line looks as follows-> 

.. code:: json

   "servicePort": 443,


change it to->


.. code:: json

   "servicePort": 80,

**Step 4**

Run the playbook - exit back into the command line of the control host and execute the following:

.. code::

   [student1@ansible ~]$ ansible-playbook as3.yml

Playbook Output
---------------

The output will look as follows.

.. code:: yaml

    [student1@ansible ~]$ ansible-playbook as3.yml

    PLAY [Linklight AS3] ***********************************************************

    TASK [Create AS3 JSON Body] ****************************************************
    ok: [f5]

    TASK [Push AS3] ****************************************************************
    ok: [f5 -> localhost]

    PLAY RECAP *********************************************************************
    f5                         : ok=2    changed=0    unreachable=0    failed=0


Verifying the Solution
----------------------

Login to the F5 with your web browser to see what was configured. Grab the IP information for the F5 load balancer from the
lab_inventory/hosts file, and type it in like so: https://X.X.X.X:8443/

1. Click on the Local Traffic on the lefthand menu
2. Click on Virtual Servers.
3. On the top right, click on the drop down menu titled ``Partition``
   and select WorkshopExample
4. The Virtual Server ``serviceMain`` will be displayed.
5. This time it will be Green
   (``Available (Enabled) - The virtual server is available``)
6. Verify under ``Pools`` for ``app_pool`` that both web servers are set
   to port **80** for their ``service_port``


**You have finished this exercise.**

Go back to the `home directory <../docs/index.rst>`_ or go `next <../docs/3.2-as3-delete.rst>`_.
